README.md, before:

# Elegant SciPy

[Try the live notebooks via MyBinder!](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/elegant-scipy/notebooks/master?filepath=index.ipynb)

This is the online repository for the book
[Elegant SciPy](http://elegant-scipy.com),
written by Juan Nunez-Iglesias (@jni), Harriet Dashnow (@hdashnow), and Stéfan
van der Walt (@stefanv), and published by O'Reilly Media:

<a href="http://elegant-scipy.com">
<img src="https://github.com/elegant-scipy/elegant-scipy/blob/master/_images/cover.jpg?raw=true"
 alt="Elegant SciPy Cover" height=256>
</a>

## Using this book.

The text of the book (inside the `markdown` folder) is available under the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Public License (see `LICENSE.md`).

**All code** is available under the BSD 3-clause license (see
`LICENSE-CODE.md`). This includes:

- Python code embedded in the text of the book.
- Python code inside `scripts/`.
- Our `Makefile` and `.yml` files.

The authors also encourage educators to use this book in their own classrooms
for noncommercial instructional uses (i.e. for slide presentations in a
university lecture), provided that there is proper attribution to the O’Reilly
edition in each instance.

If you are unsure whether your use falls outside fair use or the permissions
given above, contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

## Pre-built Jupyter notebooks

You can find the pre-compiled Jupyter notebooks corresponding to the latest
version of this repo at:

https://github.com/elegant-scipy/notebooks

This includes the necessary data in the data folder.

Or, if you are feeling adventurous, you can compile the notebooks yourself by
following the instructions below.

# Building the IPython notebooks

This book was written in markdown, with `notedown` and `jupyter nbconvert` used
to build the book. To recreate the book contents, install the dependencies,
(see below), then run `make all` from this directory (assuming you are using
Mac OS X or Linux).

For interactive exploration you probably don't want to pre-run all the code,
but rather create the notebooks with pre-populated input cells. To do this,
run, for example:

```console
notedown --match python /markdown/ch5.markdown --output ch5.ipynb
```

to build a Jupyter notebook containing Chapter 5, which you can then step
through by starting a notebook session in this directory:

```console
jupyter notebook
```

## Installing dependencies

First, we build an isolated environment as not to interrupt any
existing setup you may have.  This can be done using, e.g., Conda:

1. Install [conda](http://conda.pydata.org/miniconda.html) or Anaconda

2. Build an isolated environment called "elegant-scipy" and install the
   necessary dependencies:

```console
conda env create --name elegant-scipy -f /path/to/elegant-scipy/environment.yml
```

3. Activate the environment with `conda activate elegant-scipy` (or
   `source activate elegant-scipy` if using conda 4.3.x or earlier, or
   `activate elegant-scipy` on Windows)

### Windows

To build the full book on Windows, you will at a minimum need the following
additional software:

- [GitBash](https://git-scm.com/downloads) for Unix utilities such as "make"
- [wget](https://sourceforge.net/projects/gnuwin32/files/wget/)

Building the book on Windows is likely to be challenging because we developed
the build process on Mac and Linux. However, you should still be able to create
conda environments (see "Installing dependencies", above), and run notedown,
to make the Jupyter notebooks (see "Building the IPython notebooks", above).

If you encounter any problems, please
[raise an issue!](https://github.com/elegant-scipy/elegant-scipy/issues/new)

## Building the complete book

We are using `notedown` to convert a markdown file to an IPython
notebook, run it, and then convert to html. For ease of use, this is
done using a Makefile.

You can use `make` to build all the chapters:

```console
$ make all
```

Or to build just an individual chapter, specify the file you wish to create:

```console
$ make html/ch1.html
```

To generate a zip file containing html of all chapters along with a table of contents (for easy sharing):

```console
$ make zip
```

## Building HTMLBook

Install:
- npm: `brew install npm` (macOS) or `sudo apt-get install npm`
  (Ubuntu/Debian)
- htmlbook: `npm install -g htmlbook`
- blahtexml: `brew install blahtexml` or `sudo apt-get install blahtexml`

Then run `make htmlbook`.

The results can be checked in to

`git@git.atlas.oreilly.com:oreillymedia/elegant-scipy.git`

and built at https://atlas.oreilly.com/oreillymedia/elegant-scipy

## Building with Docker

0. Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/community-edition#/download)
1. Switch to the directory containing this file
2. Run `docker-compose up`

Commit message:

Updated dependency installation instructions.
* Added a sub-section to the README on dependency installation to
  include instructions for setting up a virtual environment using
  the built-in venv module (for non-conda users)

* Updated .gitignore to automatically ignore venv/ folder

README.md, after:

# Elegant SciPy

[Try the live notebooks via MyBinder!](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/elegant-scipy/notebooks/master?filepath=index.ipynb)

This is the online repository for the book
[Elegant SciPy](http://elegant-scipy.com),
written by Juan Nunez-Iglesias (@jni), Harriet Dashnow (@hdashnow), and Stéfan
van der Walt (@stefanv), and published by O'Reilly Media:

<a href="http://elegant-scipy.com">
<img src="https://github.com/elegant-scipy/elegant-scipy/blob/master/_images/cover.jpg?raw=true"
 alt="Elegant SciPy Cover" height=256>
</a>

## Using this book.

The text of the book (inside the `markdown` folder) is available under the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Public License (see `LICENSE.md`).

**All code** is available under the BSD 3-clause license (see
`LICENSE-CODE.md`). This includes:

- Python code embedded in the text of the book.
- Python code inside `scripts/`.
- Our `Makefile` and `.yml` files.

The authors also encourage educators to use this book in their own classrooms
for noncommercial instructional uses (i.e. for slide presentations in a
university lecture), provided that there is proper attribution to the O’Reilly
edition in each instance.

If you are unsure whether your use falls outside fair use or the permissions
given above, contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

## Pre-built Jupyter notebooks

You can find the pre-compiled Jupyter notebooks corresponding to the latest
version of this repo at:

https://github.com/elegant-scipy/notebooks

This includes the necessary data in the data folder.

Or, if you are feeling adventurous, you can compile the notebooks yourself by
following the instructions below.

# Building the IPython notebooks

This book was written in markdown, with `notedown` and `jupyter nbconvert` used
to build the book. To recreate the book contents, install the dependencies,
(see below), then run `make all` from this directory (assuming you are using
Mac OS X or Linux).

For interactive exploration you probably don't want to pre-run all the code,
but rather create the notebooks with pre-populated input cells. To do this,
run, for example:

```console
notedown --match python /markdown/ch5.markdown --output ch5.ipynb
```

to build a Jupyter notebook containing Chapter 5, which you can then step
through by starting a notebook session in this directory:

```console
jupyter notebook
```

## Installing dependencies

First, we build an isolated environment as not to interrupt any
existing setup you may have.  This can be done using, e.g., Conda or Python's
built-in virtual environment module:

### Conda install

1. Install [conda](http://conda.pydata.org/miniconda.html) or Anaconda

2. Build an isolated environment called "elegant-scipy" and install the
   necessary dependencies:

```console
conda env create --name elegant-scipy -f /path/to/elegant-scipy/environment.yml
```

3. Activate the environment with `conda activate elegant-scipy` (or
   `source activate elegant-scipy` if using conda 4.3.x or earlier, or
   `activate elegant-scipy` on Windows)

### Python `venv` module

1. Create a new virtual environment:

   ```console
   python -m venv --prompt elegant-scipy venv
   ```
   
   This will create a python virtual environment named `elegant-scipy` and 
   store it in `./venv`.

2. Activate the newly-created environment:

   ```console
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. Install the dependencies with `pip`

   ```console
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
You can remove the virtual environment at any time by deleting the `venv/` 
directory.

### Windows

To build the full book on Windows, you will at a minimum need the following
additional software:

- [GitBash](https://git-scm.com/downloads) for Unix utilities such as "make"
- [wget](https://sourceforge.net/projects/gnuwin32/files/wget/)

Building the book on Windows is likely to be challenging because we developed
the build process on Mac and Linux. However, you should still be able to create
conda environments (see "Installing dependencies", above), and run notedown,
to make the Jupyter notebooks (see "Building the IPython notebooks", above).

If you encounter any problems, please
[raise an issue!](https://github.com/elegant-scipy/elegant-scipy/issues/new)

## Building the complete book

We are using `notedown` to convert a markdown file to an IPython
notebook, run it, and then convert to html. For ease of use, this is
done using a Makefile.

You can use `make` to build all the chapters:

```console
$ make all
```

Or to build just an individual chapter, specify the file you wish to create:

```console
$ make html/ch1.html
```

To generate a zip file containing html of all chapters along with a table of contents (for easy sharing):

```console
$ make zip
```

## Building HTMLBook

Install:
- npm: `brew install npm` (macOS) or `sudo apt-get install npm`
  (Ubuntu/Debian)
- htmlbook: `npm install -g htmlbook`
- blahtexml: `brew install blahtexml` or `sudo apt-get install blahtexml`

Then run `make htmlbook`.

The results can be checked in to

`git@git.atlas.oreilly.com:oreillymedia/elegant-scipy.git`

and built at https://atlas.oreilly.com/oreillymedia/elegant-scipy

## Building with Docker

0. Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/community-edition#/download)
1. Switch to the directory containing this file
2. Run `docker-compose up`
