markdown/acknowledgements.markdown, before:

# Acknowledgements

We have to thank the many, many individuals who have made essential
contributions to this book. It would not have happened without your help.

First and foremost, we wish to thank the many contributors to the NumPy, SciPy,
and related libraries. We hope we have done your amazing work justice in this
book.

Next, the many contributors to the wider scientific Python ecosystem, including
those provided the foundation for several of our chapters: Vighnesh Birodkar,
Matt Rocklin, and Warren Weckesser. We must also thank those whose
contributions we were unable to include come press time. Your work
inspired us and we hope to include it in future versions of the book.
We also thank Nicolas Rougier for his many suggestions that we included as
examples and exercises.

Others provided us with data and code which saved us hours of searching and
sleuthing. We thank Lav Varshney for the original Matlab code for spectral
graph layout for the worm brain (chapters 3 and 6), and Stefano Allesina for
the St. Marks food web data (chapter 6).

Although we will continue to improve the book based on comments from you, our
readers, we owe a great deal to our friends and family who proofread much
earlier versions and provided valuable feedback, suggestions, and
encouragement. Malcolm Gorman, Alicia Oshack, PW van der Walt, Simon Kocbek,
Nelle Varoquaux, Ariel Rokem: thank you.

And of course, we thank our editors at O'Reilly, Meg Blanchette, Brian
MacDonald, and Nan Barber. We are especially grateful to Meg, who first
approached us about the book and who offered invaluable early guidance when we
had barely a clue what we were doing.

Commit message:

Add paragraph for pre-release contributions in preface

markdown/acknowledgements.markdown, after:

# Acknowledgements

We have to thank the many, many individuals who have made essential
contributions to this book. It would not have happened without your help.

First and foremost, we wish to thank the many contributors to the NumPy, SciPy,
and related libraries. We hope we have done your amazing work justice in this
book.

Next, the many contributors to the wider scientific Python ecosystem, including
those provided the foundation for several of our chapters: Vighnesh Birodkar,
Matt Rocklin, and Warren Weckesser. We must also thank those whose
contributions we were unable to include come press time. Your work
inspired us and we hope to include it in future versions of the book.
We also thank Nicolas Rougier for his many suggestions that we included as
examples and exercises.

Others provided us with data and code which saved us hours of searching and
sleuthing. We thank Lav Varshney for the original Matlab code for spectral
graph layout for the worm brain (chapters 3 and 6), and Stefano Allesina for
the St. Marks food web data (chapter 6).

We are indebted to everyone who made corrections and suggestions while the book
was in pre-release, including Bill Katz, Matthias Bussonnier, and
Mark Hyun-ki Kim.

Although we will continue to improve the book based on comments from you, our
readers, we owe a great deal to our friends and family who proofread much
earlier versions and provided valuable feedback, suggestions, and
encouragement. Malcolm Gorman, Alicia Oshack, PW van der Walt, Simon Kocbek,
Nelle Varoquaux, Ariel Rokem: thank you.

And of course, we thank our editors at O'Reilly, Meg Blanchette, Brian
MacDonald, and Nan Barber. We are especially grateful to Meg, who first
approached us about the book and who offered invaluable early guidance when we
had barely a clue what we were doing.
