markdown/ch6.markdown, before:

# Linear algebra in SciPy

```python
%matplotlib inline
```

Just like Chapter 4, which dealt with the Fast Fourier Transform, this chapter
will feature an elegant *method*, not so much code, which is simple. We simply
want to highlight the linear algebra packages available in SciPy, which form
the basis of much scientific computing.

## Straight linear algebra problem

e.g. one-layer NN, kernel PCA, or NN from scratch

## Graph Laplacian

We discussed graphs in chapter 3, but used a rather simple method of analysis:
*thresholding* the graph, meaning, removing all the links having weight below
some threshold. It turns out that we can think of a graph G as an *adjacency
matrix* $A$, in which $A_{i, j} = 1$ if and only if the link (i, j) is in G.
We can then use linear algebra techniques to study this matrix, with striking
results.

The *Laplacian* matrix of a graph is defined as the *degree matrix*, $D$, which
contains the degree of each node along the diagonal and 0 everywhere else,
minus the adjacency matrix $A$:

$$
L = D - A
$$

We definitely can't fit all of the linear algebra theory needed to understand
the properties of this matrix, but suffice it to say: it has some *great*
properties. We will exploit a couple in the following paragraphs.

For example, a common problem in network analysis is visualization. How do you
draw nodes and links in such a way that you don't get a complete mess such as
this one?

![network hairball](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/90/Visualization_of_wiki_structure_using_prefuse_visualization_package.png)
**Graph created by Chris Davis. [CC-BY-SA-3.0](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/GNU_Free_Documentation_License).**
**[Ed note: my reading is that we can use this figure as long as we include the
copyright notice and don't put DRM on the books, which O'Reilly doesn't do
anyway.]**

One way is to put nodes that share many links close together, and it turns out
that this can be done by using the second-smallest eigenvalue of the Laplacian
matrix.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_connectivity#The_Fiedler_vector

[Example with simple network]

Here, we will demonstrate this by reproducing
[Figure 2](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066)
from the
[Varshney *et al* paper](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066)
on the worm brain that we introduced in Chapter 3. (Information on
how to do this is in the
[supplementary material](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article/asset?unique&id=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066.s001)
for the paper.) To obtain their
layout of the worm brain neurons, they used a related matrix, the
*degree-normalized Laplacian*.

Because the order of the neurons is important in this analysis, we will use a
preprocessed dataset, rather than clutter this chapter with data cleaning. We
got the original data from Lars Varshney's
[website](http://www.ifp.illinois.edu/~varshney/elegans),
and the processed data is in our `data/` directory.

First, let us load the data. There are four components: the chemical synapse
network, the gap junction network (these are direct electrical contacts between
neurons), the neuron IDs (names), and the three neuron types:
- sensory neurons, those that detect signals coming from the outside world,
  encoded as 0;
- motor neurons, those that activate muscles, enabling the worm to move,
  encoded as 2; and
- interneurons, the neurons in between, which enable complex signal processing
  to occur between sensory neurons and motor neurons, encoded as 1.

```python
import numpy as np
chem = np.load('data/chem-network.npy')
gap = np.load('data/gap-network.npy')
neuron_ids = np.load('data/neurons.npy')
neuron_types = np.load('data/neuron-types.npy')
```

We then simplify the network, adding the two kinds of connections together,
and removing the directionality of the network by taking the average of
in-connections and out-connections of neurons. This seems a bit like cheating
but, since we are only looking for the *layout* of the neurons on a graph, we
only care about *whether* neurons are connected, not in which direction.

```python
A = chem + gap
C = (A + A.T) / 2
```

To get the Laplacian matrix, we need the degree matrix, which contains the
degree of node i at position [i, i], and zeros everywhere else.

```python
n = C.shape[0]
D = np.zeros((n, n), dtype=np.float)
diag = (np.arange(n), np.arange(n))
D[diag] = np.sum(C, axis=0)
L = D - C
```

The vertical coordinates in Fig 2 are given by arranging nodes such that, on
average, neurons are as close as possible to "just above" their downstream
neighbors. Varshney et all call this measure "processing depth," and it's
obtained by solving a linear equation involving the Laplacian. We use
`scipy.linalg.pinv`, the pseudoinverse, to solve it:

```python
from scipy import linalg
b = np.sum(C * np.sign(A - A.T), axis=1)
z = linalg.pinv(L) @ b
```

(Note the use of the `@` symbol, which was introduced in Python 3.5 to denote
matrix multiplication. In previous versions of Python, you would need to use
the function `np.dot`.)

In order to obtain the degree-normalized Laplacian, Q, we need the inverse
square root of the D matrix:

```python
Dinv2 = np.zeros((n, n))
Dinv2[diag] = D[diag] ** (-.5)
Q = Dinv2 @ L @ Dinv2
```

Finally, we are able to extract the x coordinates of the neurons to ensure that
highly-connected neurons remain close: the normalized second eigenvector of Q:

```python
eigvals, eigvecs = linalg.eig(Q)
x = Dinv2 @ eigvecs[:, 1]
```

Now it's just a matter of drawing the nodes and the links. We color them
according to the type stored in `neuron_types`:

```python
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
from matplotlib import colors

def plot_connectome(neuron_x, neuron_y, links, labels, types):
    colormap = colors.ListedColormap([(1, 0, 0),
                                      (0, 0, 1),
                                      (0, 1, 0)])
    # plot neuron locations:
    plt.scatter(neuron_x, neuron_y, c=types, cmap=colormap, zorder=1)

    # add text labels:
    for x, y, label in zip(neuron_x, neuron_y, labels):
        plt.text(x, y, '  ' + label,
                 horizontalalignment='left', verticalalignment='center',
                 fontsize=5, zorder=2)

    # plot links
    pre, post = np.nonzero(links)
    for src, dst in zip(pre, post):
        plt.plot(neuron_x[[src, dst]], neuron_y[[src, dst]],
                 c=(0.85, 0.85, 0.85), lw=0.2, alpha=0.5, zorder=0)

    plt.show()
```

```python
plt.figure(figsize=(16, 9))
plot_connectome(x, z, C, neuron_ids, neuron_types)
```

There you are: a worm brain!
As discussed in the original paper, you can see the top-down processing from
sensory neurons to motor neurons through a network of interneurons. You can
also see two distinct groups of motor neurons: these correspond to the neck
(left) and body (right) body segments of the worm.

**Exercise:** How do you modify the above code to show the affinity view in
Figure 2B from the paper?


## Community detection

Another application of the normalized graph Laplacian is in community
detection. Mark Newman published a
[seminal paper](http://www.pnas.org/content/103/23/8577.short)
on the topic in 2006. We'll apply it to the Python library dependency graph.

Where to get the data:

  * https://github.com/ogirardot/meta-deps/blob/master/PyPi%20Metadata.ipynb
  * https://ogirardot.wordpress.com/2013/01/05/state-of-the-pythonpypi-dependency-graph/
  * PyPI itself
  * github
  * something else?
  * `install_requires` vs DEPENDS.txt vs requirements.txt vs imports
  * http://furius.ca/snakefood/  (uses installed Python code. =\)

## Exercise

[ideas here?]

## Pagerank on above graph

Commit message:

Add challenge (big exercise) to adapt solution to sparse matrices

markdown/ch6.markdown, after:

# Linear algebra in SciPy

```python
%matplotlib inline
```

Just like Chapter 4, which dealt with the Fast Fourier Transform, this chapter
will feature an elegant *method*, not so much code, which is simple. We simply
want to highlight the linear algebra packages available in SciPy, which form
the basis of much scientific computing.

## Straight linear algebra problem

e.g. one-layer NN, kernel PCA, or NN from scratch

## Graph Laplacian

We discussed graphs in chapter 3, but used a rather simple method of analysis:
*thresholding* the graph, meaning, removing all the links having weight below
some threshold. It turns out that we can think of a graph G as an *adjacency
matrix* $A$, in which $A_{i, j} = 1$ if and only if the link (i, j) is in G.
We can then use linear algebra techniques to study this matrix, with striking
results.

The *Laplacian* matrix of a graph is defined as the *degree matrix*, $D$, which
contains the degree of each node along the diagonal and 0 everywhere else,
minus the adjacency matrix $A$:

$$
L = D - A
$$

We definitely can't fit all of the linear algebra theory needed to understand
the properties of this matrix, but suffice it to say: it has some *great*
properties. We will exploit a couple in the following paragraphs.

For example, a common problem in network analysis is visualization. How do you
draw nodes and links in such a way that you don't get a complete mess such as
this one?

![network hairball](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/90/Visualization_of_wiki_structure_using_prefuse_visualization_package.png)
**Graph created by Chris Davis. [CC-BY-SA-3.0](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/GNU_Free_Documentation_License).**
**[Ed note: my reading is that we can use this figure as long as we include the
copyright notice and don't put DRM on the books, which O'Reilly doesn't do
anyway.]**

One way is to put nodes that share many links close together, and it turns out
that this can be done by using the second-smallest eigenvalue of the Laplacian
matrix.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_connectivity#The_Fiedler_vector

[Example with simple network]

Here, we will demonstrate this by reproducing
[Figure 2](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066)
from the
[Varshney *et al* paper](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066)
on the worm brain that we introduced in Chapter 3. (Information on
how to do this is in the
[supplementary material](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article/asset?unique&id=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001066.s001)
for the paper.) To obtain their
layout of the worm brain neurons, they used a related matrix, the
*degree-normalized Laplacian*.

Because the order of the neurons is important in this analysis, we will use a
preprocessed dataset, rather than clutter this chapter with data cleaning. We
got the original data from Lars Varshney's
[website](http://www.ifp.illinois.edu/~varshney/elegans),
and the processed data is in our `data/` directory.

First, let us load the data. There are four components: the chemical synapse
network, the gap junction network (these are direct electrical contacts between
neurons), the neuron IDs (names), and the three neuron types:
- sensory neurons, those that detect signals coming from the outside world,
  encoded as 0;
- motor neurons, those that activate muscles, enabling the worm to move,
  encoded as 2; and
- interneurons, the neurons in between, which enable complex signal processing
  to occur between sensory neurons and motor neurons, encoded as 1.

```python
import numpy as np
chem = np.load('data/chem-network.npy')
gap = np.load('data/gap-network.npy')
neuron_ids = np.load('data/neurons.npy')
neuron_types = np.load('data/neuron-types.npy')
```

We then simplify the network, adding the two kinds of connections together,
and removing the directionality of the network by taking the average of
in-connections and out-connections of neurons. This seems a bit like cheating
but, since we are only looking for the *layout* of the neurons on a graph, we
only care about *whether* neurons are connected, not in which direction.

```python
A = chem + gap
C = (A + A.T) / 2
```

To get the Laplacian matrix, we need the degree matrix, which contains the
degree of node i at position [i, i], and zeros everywhere else.

```python
n = C.shape[0]
D = np.zeros((n, n), dtype=np.float)
diag = (np.arange(n), np.arange(n))
D[diag] = np.sum(C, axis=0)
L = D - C
```

The vertical coordinates in Fig 2 are given by arranging nodes such that, on
average, neurons are as close as possible to "just above" their downstream
neighbors. Varshney et all call this measure "processing depth," and it's
obtained by solving a linear equation involving the Laplacian. We use
`scipy.linalg.pinv`, the pseudoinverse, to solve it:

```python
from scipy import linalg
b = np.sum(C * np.sign(A - A.T), axis=1)
z = linalg.pinv(L) @ b
```

(Note the use of the `@` symbol, which was introduced in Python 3.5 to denote
matrix multiplication. In previous versions of Python, you would need to use
the function `np.dot`.)

In order to obtain the degree-normalized Laplacian, Q, we need the inverse
square root of the D matrix:

```python
Dinv2 = np.zeros((n, n))
Dinv2[diag] = D[diag] ** (-.5)
Q = Dinv2 @ L @ Dinv2
```

Finally, we are able to extract the x coordinates of the neurons to ensure that
highly-connected neurons remain close: the normalized second eigenvector of Q:

```python
eigvals, eigvecs = linalg.eig(Q)
x = Dinv2 @ eigvecs[:, 1]
```

Now it's just a matter of drawing the nodes and the links. We color them
according to the type stored in `neuron_types`:

```python
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
from matplotlib import colors

def plot_connectome(neuron_x, neuron_y, links, labels, types):
    colormap = colors.ListedColormap([(1, 0, 0),
                                      (0, 0, 1),
                                      (0, 1, 0)])
    # plot neuron locations:
    plt.scatter(neuron_x, neuron_y, c=types, cmap=colormap, zorder=1)

    # add text labels:
    for x, y, label in zip(neuron_x, neuron_y, labels):
        plt.text(x, y, '  ' + label,
                 horizontalalignment='left', verticalalignment='center',
                 fontsize=5, zorder=2)

    # plot links
    pre, post = np.nonzero(links)
    for src, dst in zip(pre, post):
        plt.plot(neuron_x[[src, dst]], neuron_y[[src, dst]],
                 c=(0.85, 0.85, 0.85), lw=0.2, alpha=0.5, zorder=0)

    plt.show()
```

```python
plt.figure(figsize=(16, 9))
plot_connectome(x, z, C, neuron_ids, neuron_types)
```

There you are: a worm brain!
As discussed in the original paper, you can see the top-down processing from
sensory neurons to motor neurons through a network of interneurons. You can
also see two distinct groups of motor neurons: these correspond to the neck
(left) and body (right) body segments of the worm.

**Exercise:** How do you modify the above code to show the affinity view in
Figure 2B from the paper?

### challenge: linear algebra with sparse matrices

The above code uses numpy arrays to hold the matrix and perform
the necessary computations. Because it is a small graph of fewer than 300
nodes, this is feasible. However, for larger graphs, it would fail.

In what follows, we will analyze the dependency graph for packages in the
Python Package Index, or PyPI, which contains over 75 thousand packages. To
hold the Laplacian matrix for this graph would take up
$8 \left(75 \times 10^3\right)^2 = 45 \times 10^9$ bytes, or 45GB,
of RAM. If you add to that the adjacency, symmetric adjacency, pseudoinverse,
and, say, two temporary matrices used during calculations, you climb up to
270GB, beyond the reach of most desktop computers.

However, we know that the dependency graph is *sparse*: packages usually depend
on just a few other packages, not on the whole of PyPI. So we can hold the
above matrices using the sparse data structures from `scipy.sparse` (see
Chapter 5), and use the linear algebra functions in `scipy.sparse.linalg` to
compute the values we need.

Try to explore the documentation in `scipy.sparse.linalg` to come up with a
sparse version of the above computation.

Hint: the pseudoinverse of a sparse matrix is, in general, not sparse, so you
can't use it here. Similarly, you can't get all the eigenvectors of a sparse
matrix, because they would together make up a dense matrix.

The solution is found in what follows, but we highly recommend that you try it
on your own!

## Community detection

Another application of the normalized graph Laplacian is in community
detection. Mark Newman published a
[seminal paper](http://www.pnas.org/content/103/23/8577.short)
on the topic in 2006. We'll apply it to the Python library dependency graph.

Where to get the data:

  * https://github.com/ogirardot/meta-deps/blob/master/PyPi%20Metadata.ipynb
  * https://ogirardot.wordpress.com/2013/01/05/state-of-the-pythonpypi-dependency-graph/
  * PyPI itself
  * github
  * something else?
  * `install_requires` vs DEPENDS.txt vs requirements.txt vs imports
  * http://furius.ca/snakefood/  (uses installed Python code. =\)

## Exercise

[ideas here?]

## Pagerank on above graph
