markdown/epilogue.markdown, before:

# Epilogue

> Quality means doing it right when no one is looking.
>
> — Henry Ford

Our main goal with this book was promoting elegant uses of the NumPy and SciPy
libraries, and, we hope, inspiring in you the feeling that quality code is
something worth striving for, while teaching you how to do effective scientific
analysis with SciPy.

## Where to next?
- Parts of the SciPy Ecosystem we haven't covered
- Other books/websites/resources
- Conferences (and their recorded sessions - links)
- Online courses
- Mailing lists and other resources for libraries covered in the book

## Contributing to the SciPy ecosystem
Why contribute?
Promises from preface:
We will help you get started in GitHub land
Later in Elegant SciPy we will show you how to contribute your new skills to the GitHub-hosted projects that comprise most of the scientific Python ecosystem.

### Learning how to use Git and GitHub
If you are completely new to Git, we suggest you look at a beginner tutorial first (link - software carpentry http://software-carpentry.org/lessons/).
What you will need to know to contribute to an open source project using Git (although some of this you can pick up by doing it!)
- Basic Git commands: clone, add, commit, push, pull, branch.
- Git commands that will likely be useful (but are not essential to get started):
merge, rebase, cherry-pick.
- Common GitHub actions: forking, pull requests, issues.

Some resources for learning Git/GitHub:
- Huff/Scopatz, Effective Computation in Physics
- Other O'Reilly books on git/github/pull requests
- Online tutorials

### How to contribute to SciPy and related packages specifically (community rules?) and GitHub etiquette
- When and where to raise GitHub issues
- When to use pull requests

### Testing

## Open Science
Why do open science?
- Reminder about open source licenses (refer to introduction)
- Open data
- Open access and preprints

Commit message:

Add paragraph about mailing list

markdown/epilogue.markdown, after:

# Epilogue

> Quality means doing it right when no one is looking.
>
> — Henry Ford

Our main goal with this book was promoting elegant uses of the NumPy and SciPy
libraries, and, we hope, inspiring in you the feeling that quality code is
something worth striving for, while teaching you how to do effective scientific
analysis with SciPy.

## Where to next?

We mentioned in the preface that SciPy is a community. A great way to continue
learning is to subscribe to the main mailing lists for NumPy, SciPy, pandas,
matplotlib, scikit-image, and other libraries you might be interested in, and read
them regularly.

And when you do get stuck in your own work, don't be afraid to seek help there! We
are a friendly bunch! The *main* requirement when seeking help is to show that
you've tried a bit of problem solving yourself, and to provide others with a
minimal script to demonstrate your problem and how you've tried to fix it.

- **No:** "I need to generate a big array of random Gaussians. Can someone
  help?"
- **No:** "I have this huge library at https://github.com/ron_obvious, if you
  look in the statistics library, there's a part that really needs random
  Gaussians, can someone take a look???"
- **Yes:** "I've been trying to generate a big list of random Gaussians like
  so: `gauss = [np.random.randn()] * 10**5`. But when I compute `np.mean(gauss)`,
  it's hardly ever as close to 0 as I expect. What am I doing wrong? The full
  script ready for copy-paste is below.



- Parts of the SciPy Ecosystem we haven't covered
- Other books/websites/resources
- Conferences (and their recorded sessions - links)
- Online courses
- Mailing lists and other resources for libraries covered in the book

## Contributing to the SciPy ecosystem
Why contribute?
Promises from preface:
We will help you get started in GitHub land
Later in Elegant SciPy we will show you how to contribute your new skills to the GitHub-hosted projects that comprise most of the scientific Python ecosystem.

### Learning how to use Git and GitHub
If you are completely new to Git, we suggest you look at a beginner tutorial first (link - software carpentry http://software-carpentry.org/lessons/).
What you will need to know to contribute to an open source project using Git (although some of this you can pick up by doing it!)
- Basic Git commands: clone, add, commit, push, pull, branch.
- Git commands that will likely be useful (but are not essential to get started):
merge, rebase, cherry-pick.
- Common GitHub actions: forking, pull requests, issues.

Some resources for learning Git/GitHub:
- Huff/Scopatz, Effective Computation in Physics
- Other O'Reilly books on git/github/pull requests
- Online tutorials

### How to contribute to SciPy and related packages specifically (community rules?) and GitHub etiquette
- When and where to raise GitHub issues
- When to use pull requests

### Testing

## Open Science
Why do open science?
- Reminder about open source licenses (refer to introduction)
- Open data
- Open access and preprints
